# SmartCampusAPI

Part 1: Service Architecture & Setup 
1)  In your report, explain the default lifecycle of a JAX-RS Resource class. Is a new instance instantiated for every incoming request, or does the runtime treat it as a singleton? Elaborate on how this architectural decision impacts the way you manage and synchronize your in-memory data structures (maps/lists) to prevent data loss or race con ditions.
•	Each time an HTTP request is received by a server in JAX-RS, a new instance of the resource is created, so any instance variables that belong to that instance of the resource will not be accessible across multiple requests. However, the project will contain static lists for storing resource data (e.g., rooms, sensors, and measurements). As such, these static lists can serve as globally accessible, in-memory data. Yes, under a multi-threaded model, it is possible that this will lead to a concurrency problem: Two or more requests accessing or modifying the same list at the same time could result in race conditions and data inconsistency issues. Therefore, there are a number of possible solutions for avoiding such issues via the use of thread-safe mechanisms (e.g., synchronized collections, synchronized blocks, concurrent data structures). However, due to the simplicity of the project, standard list classes were used. This approach is reasonable since most other production applications that require concurrency will typically use a database or some other form of thread-safe methods to store data.


2)  Why is the provision of ”Hypermedia” (links and navigation within responses) considered a hallmark of advanced RESTful design (HATEOAS)? How does this approach benefit client developers compared to static documentation?
•	HATEOAS (Hypermedia as the Engine of Application State), or hypermedia, is an advanced RESTful design approach because it allows a server to provide links and navigation options in the API responses. Rather than relying on fixed URLs or outside documentation to determine what the client can do, the client is able to dynamically discover what they can do via the provided links (e.g., next, delete, or update). By providing clients with links, they can create flexible, self-descriptive APIs where clients will not need to hard-code the endpoint structure for their applications. Compared to static documentation, using hypermedia reduces the likelihood of errors when an API has been changed; it enhances maintainability of the system; and, it makes client applications more adaptable to any new feature or modification that may occur, therefore making a more robust, loosely coupled solution.

Part 2: Room Management
1)  When returning a list of rooms, what are the implications of returning only IDs versus returning the full room objects? Consider network bandwidth and client side processing.
•	When you provide only the ID to request a room list, it will decrease the number of bytes transferred over the network. Therefore, this will help improve performance and reduce the bandwidth used by the client, especially with larger datasets. However, this results in additional requests to the server by the client to retrieve full room information increasing client complexity and adding to the number of API calls made.

On the other hand, if the server sends back complete room objects as part of the response, then all required information would be sent to the client in a single response, thus simplifying the client processing and not requiring additional requests to retrieve all needed information. Unfortunately, this also has the effect of increasing both the payload size and the network load. The final determination therefore comes down to which method is best for the specific use case. The use of IDs will perform better for low-volume operations; whereas, the use of complete object will be help with client-side development.

2)  Is the DELETE operation idempotent in your implementation? Provide a detailed justification by describing what happens if a client mistakenly sends the exact same DELETE request for a room multiple times.
•	The deletion of a room via a DELETE request is an idempotent operation. Idempotence refers to the fact that performing an operation multiple times will have no additional impact once it has already been performed successfully. Therefore, when a client sends a DELETE request to delete an available room from the list of available rooms, there will no longer be an available room; thus, applying subsequent DELETE requests to delete this available room will have no effect. However, when the client issues a subsequent DELETE request for the same room, an error will result because the room has already been deleted. There will be no change to the state of the system as a result of the subsequent DELETE requests made after the first DELETE request and therefore there will be no new information created in the system as a result of the DELETE operation, thus satisfying the criteria for idempotent operations, where subsequent operations will have no additional effects on or changes to the state of the system from the original delete operation on the room.

Part 3: Sensor Operations & Linking

1) We explicitly use the @Consumes (MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON) annotation on the POST method. Explain the technical consequences if a client attempts to send data in a different format, such as text/plain or application/xml. How does JAX-RS handle this mismatch?
•	The way clients submit requests to an API will be restricted based on their submission format. The format restrictions are communicated to clients through the application programming interface (API) definition for the application using the @Consumes(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON) annotation at the API level. For example, if the client were to submit data using a submission format using text/plain, xml, or any other unsupported format the client will not be able to associate their incoming request with a method within the JAX-RS API and, therefore, will receive a response from the server as to why the client was unable to submit the data in the proper format (415 Unsupported Media Type). By establishing that the server is expecting data in a specific format, an implementation will allow for all data received to be processed by the server in a uniform manner thus eliminating any potential for an error to occur as a result of different means of submitting data and treating all data as equivalents while processing the entire application regardless of how the information was submitted by the client.

2)  You implemented this filtering using @QueryParam. Contrast this with an alternative design where the type is part of the URL path (e.g., api/vl/sensors/type/CO2). Why is the query parameter approach generally considered superior for filtering and searching collections?
•	In summary, the @QueryParam way of filtering (such as by using /api/v1/sensors?type=CO2) is clearer than using the URL. This is because it clearly indicates that you're filtering/s searching within a collection rather than requesting an individual resource using the URL. By utilizing query parameters, users can have multiple filtering options (i.e., type, location, and status) without changing the endpoint design. Instead of placing the filter value as part of the URL (i.e., /api/v1/sensors/type/CO2) and giving the user the impression of retrieving a sub-resource that is a particular type, the use of query parameters provides the user with a way to search using multiple filters with improved flexibility and adherence to RESTful design principles, as well as improving the readability of the API for users and in future API expansions since query parameters do not require any newly added permanent endpoints
Part 4: Deep Nesting with Sub- Resources
1)  Discuss the architectural benefits of the Sub-Resource Locator pattern. How does delegating logic to separate classes help manage complexity in large APIs compared to defining every nested path (e.g., sensors/{id}/readings/{rid}) in one massive con troller class?
•	By using sub-resource locators to implement their architecture, APIs can achieve greater flexibility and scalability in how they structure their resource handling. Single controller classes that process many different types of resources (e.g., each piece of equipment) can lead to a large amount of code that is difficult to maintain. This can create many opportunities for mistakes and duplicate code. Creating smaller, independent controller classes (one for each group of similar resources) to process similar resources (e.g., sensors and their readings) allows resource locators to create a higher level of abstraction for developers when they are writing business logic so they can structure their solution in as modular a manner as possible. In addition, it is much simpler for developers to add additional features or nested resources to their solutions without having an effect on the main controller classes.

Part 5: Advanced Error Handling, Exception Mapping & Logging
1)  Why is HTTP422 often considered more semantically accurate than a standard 404 when the issue is a missing reference inside a valid JSON payload?
•	The use of a 404 response code (Not Found) by the server does not provide an accurate indication of whether the request body received is a valid JSON body with the properties for an invalid entity. The client making the request is not able to find a resource at the endpoint based on the request and received a valid request that specified the structure of the request and the structure of therefore refers to the endpoint correctly, but the logic of the content does not apply to the request and the requested resource(s) is logically associated with the request. Therefore, when a JSON request does not contain sensorId and therefore, the server will provide a proper 422 response (Unprocessable Entity) and thereby provide the client and/or subsequently associated with the server with explicit details of the validation error(s) associated with the request. Furthermore, since the server cannot provide an appropriate 404 response code, the service will issue an appropriate 422 response code that provides information regarding the validation errors and/or the service cannot appropriately issue a proper 404 response to the client.

2)  From a cybersecurity standpoint, explain the risks associated with exposing internal Java stack traces to external API consumers. What specific information could an attacker gather from such a trace?
•	Providing external consumers with internal Java stack traces can create serious cybersecurity vulnerabilities. To give an example, let's say an external consumer receives the implementation details about how an application works in a stack trace (including but not limited to: the class names, package structures, file paths, method names and libraries/frameworks). By giving this information to a potential attacker, he/she will now have some insight into how to structure his/her attack against the application since he/she will know the internal layout of the application and will know what implementation is vulnerable to an attack. For example, if an attacker knows the framework being used and the exact revision of that framework, then the attacker can potentially exploit any known vulnerabilities. Additionally, if the attacker knows the file path of an application server, then the attacker may be able to use the hierarchical structure of the application server to locate other vulnerable implementations within that application server. Therefore, stack traces should not be provided to external consumers in production environments.

3) Why is it advantageous to use JAX-RS filters for cross-cutting concerns like logging, rather than manually inserting Logger.info() statements inside every single re source method?
•	The use of JAX-RS filters facilitates the management of cross-cutting tasks (such as logging) through the collection of common code into a single location (i.e., filter) rather than by repetitively coding that common functionality for each of the resource methods. Each filter allows the logging logic to be applied automatically for each in- and out-bound request (which increases the reuse and consistency of your code). However, if you are manually including Logger.info() statements in each of your methods, you are creating duplicate code, causing additional maintenance effort (due to the number of messages you will not have), and increasing the possibility that you will miss a log message or create an error. Filter usage separates logging from business logic, thereby increasing the readability of the code, forcing a cleaner architecture, and enabling the update or extension of the logging
